Adding readme and new topology file required for dataplane hashing test (#5570)
openconfig/featureprofiles: feature/gribi/otg_tests/hashing_test/README.md

# Hashing: Dataplane Hashing with Physical/Software Loopbacks

## Summary
Verify Dataplane Hashing using a mix of physical loopback ports and software loopback interfaces across multiple Network Instances.

## Topology
The test requires a DUT and an ATE.

> The topology uses a complex loopback configuration to route traffic through multiple hashing stages on the DUT.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The topology uses a multple looped back ports configuration to route traffic through multiple hashing stages on the DUT.
```

```mermaid
graph TD
    Ingress[ATE Ingress: Port 2] -->|Traffic| IngressPort[DUT Ingress: lc2_p10]
    IngressPort --> DefaultVRF{Default VRF}
    

>     subgraph Stage 1: Default VRF (WCMP 7:1:1:1)

Reviewer: marmaid rendederer throw syntax error. Possible wrong marmaid version or something.

- **Stage 2 Soft Loops**: 4 ports configured in TERMINAL loopback mode, member of LAGs.
- **Stage 3 Soft Loops**: 5 ports configured in TERMINAL loopback mode, member of LAGs.
Total 12 software loopbacks are dynamically discovered and configured.

ATE Connection:
- **ATE Port 2** (ixia2) connects to **DUT Port lc2_p10** (Ingress).

## Test Scenario 1: Hash Distribution 

### 1. Baseline Configuration
- Configure all DUT ports as LAG interfaces (each port in its own LAG, e.g., `lc2_p10` in `lag110`).
- Configure 12 discovered unused ports as soft loops (in TERMINAL loopback mode, each in its own LAG).
- Configure Static ARP on all interfaces.
- Configure ACLs on all soft loops to drop ingress traffic (to prevent loops/packet storm).
- Configure Network Instances (VRFs): `TRANSIT`, `SELF_SITE`, `EGRESS`.
- Assign interfaces to VRFs:
  - Default VRF: Ingress `lc2_p10`, Stage 1 Soft Loops.
  - `TRANSIT` VRF: `lc2_p3` (Loop 1 RX), `lc1_p4` (Loop 2 TX), `lc1_p5` (Loop 3 TX), `lc1_p6` (Loop 4 TX), `lc1_p1` (Loop 5 TX), Stage 2 Soft Loops.
  - `SELF_SITE` VRF: `lc2_p6` (Loop 4 RX), `lc2_p1` (Loop 5 RX), `lc2_p8` (Loop 6 TX), `lc2_p7` (Loop 7 TX), `lc2_p2` (Loop 8 TX), Stage 3 Soft Loops.

>   - `EGRESS` VRF: `lc2_p4` (Loop 2 RX), `lc2_p5` (Loop 3 RX), `lc1_p8` (Loop 6 RX), `lc1_p7` (Loop 7 RX), `lc1_p2` (Loop 8 RX).

Author: Interface belong to Default VRF if it's not explicitly assigned to any VRF.

>   - `EGRESS` VRF: `lc2_p4` (Loop 2 RX), `lc2_p5` (Loop 3 RX), `lc1_p8` (Loop 6 RX), `lc1_p7` (Loop 7 RX), `lc1_p2` (Loop 8 RX).

Reviewer 2: can you please make this explicit?

>   - `EGRESS` VRF: `lc2_p4` (Loop 2 RX), `lc2_p5` (Loop 3 RX), `lc1_p8` (Loop 6 RX), `lc1_p7` (Loop 7 RX), `lc1_p2` (Loop 8 RX).

Author: That's device function. Bydefault all interfaces are part of global/default routing instance aka Default VRF

>   - `EGRESS` VRF: `lc2_p4` (Loop 2 RX), `lc2_p5` (Loop 3 RX), `lc1_p8` (Loop 6 RX), `lc1_p7` (Loop 7 RX), `lc1_p2` (Loop 8 RX).

Reviewer 2: Understood,  but please call this out explicitly that lc2_p9 in the default VRF so that it is intuitive to the implementer

### 2. Interface VRF Assignment Configuration
Assign RX ports of the loopbacks to their respective VRFs to route traffic to the next stage VRF:
- **On `lc2_p3` (Loop 1 RX)**: Assign to `TRANSIT` VRF.
- **On `lc2_p6`, `lc2_p1` (Loop 4, 5 RX)**: Assign to `SELF_SITE` VRF.
- **On `lc2_p4`, `lc2_p5` (Loop 2, 3 RX)**: Assign to `EGRESS` VRF.
- **On `lc1_p8`, `lc1_p7`, `lc1_p2` (Loop 6, 7, 8 RX)**: Assign to `EGRESS` VRF.

### 3. gRIBI Programming
- **Default VRF**:
  - Route `198.51.100.1/32` -> NHG 1 (WCMP: `lc1_p3` weight 7, 3 soft loops weight 1 each).
- **`TRANSIT` VRF**:
  - Route `198.51.100.1/32` -> NHG 2 (ECMP 8-wide: `lc1_p4`, `lc1_p5`, `lc1_p6`, `lc1_p1` and 4 soft loops, weight 1 each).
- **`SELF_SITE` VRF**:
  - Route `198.51.100.1/32` -> NHG 3 (ECMP 8-wide: `lc2_p8`, `lc2_p7`, `lc2_p2` and 5 soft loops, weight 1 each).

### 4. Traffic Verification
- Send traffic from ATE Port 2 to `198.51.100.1` with varying source IPv4 addresses, and varying UDP source and destination ports (to trigger hashing).
- Verify packet distribution:
  - **Stage 1**: ~70% to `lc1_p3`, ~10% to each of the 3 soft loops.

>   - **Stage 2 (Transit VRF)**: ~12.5% to each of the 8 members of NHG 2 (within tolerance).

Reviewer: Please define tolerance:e.g. "+/- 2%  of expected value"
That mean if expected value is 12.5%, then acceptable range would be (12.5% * 98% ) - (12.5% * 102%) --> 12.25%-12.75%

        SelfSiteVRF --> Loop8["Loop 8: lc2_p2 -> lc1_p2"]
        SelfSiteVRF --> SL7["Soft Loop 7: lag125"]
        SelfSiteVRF --> SL8["Soft Loop 8: lag126"]
        SelfSiteVRF --> SL9["Soft Loop 9: lag127"]
        SelfSiteVRF --> SL10["Soft Loop 10: lag128"]
        SelfSiteVRF --> SL11["Soft Loop 11: lag129"]
    end
    
    SL7 --> Drop3["ACL Drop"]
    SL8 --> Drop3
    SL9 --> Drop3
    SL10 --> Drop3
    SL11 --> Drop3
    
    Loop6 -->|VRF Assignment: lc1_p8 in Egress| EgressVRF
    Loop7 -->|VRF Assignment: lc1_p7 in Egress| EgressVRF
    Loop8 -->|VRF Assignment: lc1_p2 in Egress| EgressVRF
```

### Port Details and Loopbacks
The test utilizes physical loopback cables and software terminal loopbacks.
Physical loopbacks are formed by connecting two ports on the same DUT:
- **Loop 1**: `lc1_p3` <-> `lc2_p3`
- **Loop 2**: `lc1_p4` <-> `lc2_p4`
- **Loop 3**: `lc1_p5` <-> `lc2_p5`
- **Loop 4**: `lc1_p6` <-> `lc2_p6`
- **Loop 5**: `lc1_p1` <-> `lc2_p1` (Remapped)
- **Loop 6**: `lc2_p8` <-> `lc1_p8`
- **Loop 7**: `lc2_p7` <-> `lc1_p7`
- **Loop 8**: `lc2_p2` <-> `lc1_p2` (Remapped)

Software loopbacks (Terminal Loopbacks) are configured on the DUT ports:

> - **Stage 1 Soft Loops**: 3 ports configured in TERMINAL loopback mode, member of LAGs.

Reviewer 2: Do we want to call out on which LAG members ?

Author: each lag will have only one member. total 4 egress NH in first stage. let me refine the wording

- Configure Static ARP on all interfaces.
- Configure ACLs on all soft loops to drop ingress traffic (to prevent loops/packet storm).
- Configure Network Instances (VRFs): `TRANSIT`, `SELF_SITE`, `EGRESS`.
- Assign interfaces to VRFs:
  - Default VRF: Ingress `lc2_p10`, Stage 1 Soft Loops.
  - `TRANSIT` VRF: `lc2_p3` (Loop 1 RX), `lc1_p4` (Loop 2 TX), `lc1_p5` (Loop 3 TX), `lc1_p6` (Loop 4 TX), `lc1_p1` (Loop 5 TX), Stage 2 Soft Loops.
  - `SELF_SITE` VRF: `lc2_p6` (Loop 4 RX), `lc2_p1` (Loop 5 RX), `lc2_p8` (Loop 6 TX), `lc2_p7` (Loop 7 TX), `lc2_p2` (Loop 8 TX), Stage 3 Soft Loops.
  - `EGRESS` VRF: `lc2_p4` (Loop 2 RX), `lc2_p5` (Loop 3 RX), `lc1_p8` (Loop 6 RX), `lc1_p7` (Loop 7 RX), `lc1_p2` (Loop 8 RX).

### 2. Interface VRF Assignment Configuration
Assign RX ports of the loopbacks to their respective VRFs to route traffic to the next stage VRF:
- **On `lc2_p3` (Loop 1 RX)**: Assign to `TRANSIT` VRF.
- **On `lc2_p6`, `lc2_p1` (Loop 4, 5 RX)**: Assign to `SELF_SITE` VRF.
- **On `lc2_p4`, `lc2_p5` (Loop 2, 3 RX)**: Assign to `EGRESS` VRF.
- **On `lc1_p8`, `lc1_p7`, `lc1_p2` (Loop 6, 7, 8 RX)**: Assign to `EGRESS` VRF.

### 3. gRIBI Programming
- **Default VRF**:

>   - Route `198.51.100.1/32` -> NHG 1 (WCMP: `lc1_p3` weight 7, 3 soft loops weight 1 each).

Reviewer 2: who should have this IP? should this be configured somewhere?

Author: this is gRIBI route programmed in VRFs to route the traffic. actually this needs a change since the plan is to use multiple different destination address. I will change it to /24

- **`TRANSIT` VRF**:
  - Route `198.51.100.1/32` -> NHG 2 (ECMP 8-wide: `lc1_p4`, `lc1_p5`, `lc1_p6`, `lc1_p1` and 4 soft loops, weight 1 each).
- **`SELF_SITE` VRF**:
  - Route `198.51.100.1/32` -> NHG 3 (ECMP 8-wide: `lc2_p8`, `lc2_p7`, `lc2_p2` and 5 soft loops, weight 1 each).

### 4. Traffic Verification
- Send traffic from ATE Port 2 to `198.51.100.1` with varying source IPv4 addresses, and varying UDP source and destination ports (to trigger hashing).
- Tolerance is defined as ±2% of the expected value (e.g., if expected value is 12.5%, acceptable range is 12.25% – 12.75%).
- Verify packet distribution:
  - **Stage 1**: ~70% to `lc1_p3`, ~10% to each of the 3 soft loops (within tolerance).

>   - **Stage 2 (Transit VRF)**: ~12.5% to each of the 8 members of NHG 2 (within tolerance of 12.25% – 12.75%).

Reviewer 2: How should one calculate this ? Since there is only 70% coming in should this be 8-wide ECMP into  ~8.75% , similarly to stage 3.
Can you add more description into the why behind this on how you arrived at this math , that would make the script development easier.

Author: this 12.5% represent the ratio of the traffic. 70% is egress from first stage but for second stage, it takes whatever traffic is coming (70% in this case) and distribute them among the 8 NHs.
The traffic ratio only matters for egress not ingress here.

Author: why? because this is Hashing performance requirement and accepted deviation (+-2%) tolerance

Reviewer 2: this makes sense, please add this description in the read me so that , implementer if not you can understand this without having to look back.

    
    subgraph Stage3 ["Stage 3: Self-Site VRF (ECMP 8-wide)"]
        SelfSiteVRF --> Loop6["Loop 6: lc2_p8 -> lc1_p8"]
        SelfSiteVRF --> Loop7["Loop 7: lc2_p7 -> lc1_p7"]
        SelfSiteVRF --> Loop8["Loop 8: lc2_p2 -> lc1_p2"]
        SelfSiteVRF --> SL7["Soft Loop 7: lag125"]
        SelfSiteVRF --> SL8["Soft Loop 8: lag126"]
        SelfSiteVRF --> SL9["Soft Loop 9: lag127"]
        SelfSiteVRF --> SL10["Soft Loop 10: lag128"]
        SelfSiteVRF --> SL11["Soft Loop 11: lag129"]
    end
    
    SL7 --> Drop3["ACL Drop"]
    SL8 --> Drop3
    SL9 --> Drop3
    SL10 --> Drop3
    SL11 --> Drop3
    
    Loop6 -->|VRF Assignment: lc1_p8 in Egress| EgressVRF
    Loop7 -->|VRF Assignment: lc1_p7 in Egress| EgressVRF
    Loop8 -->|VRF Assignment: lc1_p2 in Egress| EgressVRF
    
    EgressVRF --> EgressPort["DUT Egress: lc2_p9"] --> Egress["ATE Egress: Port 1 (ixia1)"]
```

### Port Details and Loopbacks
The test utilizes physical loopback cables and software terminal loopbacks.
Physical loopbacks are formed by connecting two ports on the same DUT:
- **Loop 1**: `lc1_p3` <-> `lc2_p3`
- **Loop 2**: `lc1_p4` <-> `lc2_p4`

> - **Loop 3**: `lc1_p5` <-> `lc2_p5`

Reviewer: What "remapped) nmean?

Author: Thats was just added during the test, remapped means ports mapping was changed. i have deleted it

  - `TRANSIT` VRF: `lc2_p3` (Loop 1 RX), `lc1_p4` (Loop 2 TX), `lc1_p5` (Loop 3 TX), `lc1_p6` (Loop 4 TX), `lc1_p1` (Loop 5 TX), Stage 2 Soft Loops.
  - `SELF_SITE` VRF: `lc2_p6` (Loop 4 RX), `lc2_p1` (Loop 5 RX), `lc2_p8` (Loop 6 TX), `lc2_p7` (Loop 7 TX), `lc2_p2` (Loop 8 TX), Stage 3 Soft Loops.
  - `EGRESS` VRF: `lc2_p4` (Loop 2 RX), `lc2_p5` (Loop 3 RX), `lc1_p8` (Loop 6 RX), `lc1_p7` (Loop 7 RX), `lc1_p2` (Loop 8 RX), `lc2_p9` (Egress).

### 2. Interface VRF Assignment Configuration
Assign RX ports of the loopbacks to their respective VRFs to route traffic to the next stage VRF:
- **On `lc2_p3` (Loop 1 RX)**: Assign to `TRANSIT` VRF.
- **On `lc2_p6`, `lc2_p1` (Loop 4, 5 RX)**: Assign to `SELF_SITE` VRF.
- **On `lc2_p4`, `lc2_p5` (Loop 2, 3 RX)**: Assign to `EGRESS` VRF.
- **On `lc1_p8`, `lc1_p7`, `lc1_p2` (Loop 6, 7, 8 RX)**: Assign to `EGRESS` VRF.

### 3. gRIBI Programming
- **Default VRF**:
  - Route `198.51.100.0/24` -> NHG 1 (WCMP: `lc1_p3` weight 7, 3 soft loops weight 1 each).
- **`TRANSIT` VRF**:
  - Route `198.51.100.0/24` -> NHG 2 (ECMP 8-wide: `lc1_p4`, `lc1_p5`, `lc1_p6`, `lc1_p1` and 4 soft loops, weight 1 each).
- **`SELF_SITE` VRF**:

>   - Route `198.51.100.0/24` -> NHG 3 (ECMP 8-wide: `lc2_p8`, `lc2_p7`, `lc2_p2` and 5 soft loops, weight 1 each).

Reviewer: - Maybe it would be better to have IP-in-IPv4 packet with varring inner 5-tuple? Or have it as other test?

This will be closer to prod. #-ing over IPinIP may be less effective.

Author: Yes, This is one of the scenario. I will add IP-in-IP test as well after this including gRIBI hierarchical tests to cover all possible scenarios
